# Women_Safety_ML_Model
This model is a Real-Time webcam-based safety system which can detect the Help Hand Symbol of a woman,
and logs the event with a timestamp. Made as an AI-powered safety alert system, which can be integrated into surveillance, security, or emergency response systems.

The model was trained upon a total of 2307 human face images( 1173 male + 1134 female ) for better recognization & differentiation of men and women.

## Porject Features
- Real-time gender detection using OpenCV and a trained CNN model.
- Counts the no. of people ( no. of men and no. of woman in the frame ).
- Detects alone woman surrounded by men.
- Detects the **HELP!** hand gesture.
- Generates log incase help symbol is initiated by woman.
- The generated log is read by a live web dashboard interface for better representation, having an auto-refreshing UI every 30 seconds to stay up to date.
- Time-stamped detection entries with controlled intervals.

## Model Details
**Framework:** TensorFlow /Keras
**Architecture:** CNN with BathcNormalization, Dropout, MaxPooling
**Training Data:** Labeled images
**Output:** Binary classification: 0(man), 1(woman).

## Project Struture

- ├── main.py                 #Real-time detection and Excel logging
- ├── train.py                #CNN model training script
- ├── gender_detection.h5     #Trained gender classification model
- ├── detection_log.xlsx      #Excel sheet to log detection events
- ├── webpage.html            #Web UI to display detection logs
- └── shield.jpg              #Logo used in the UI
- └── gender_dataset_face     #Dataset folder

**NOTE**  gender_detection.h5
This file is automatically generated when you run train.py.
- It stores:
- - The model architecture
  - The trained weights
  - The optimizer configuration (if saved)
  - This file is then loaded in main.py for real-time inference.

## Getting Started

**1. Clone the repository**
*git clone https://github.com/rishavkumar584/Women_Safety_ML_Model.git*
*cd Shield_Her*

**2. Install the Dependencies**
*pip install tensorflow opencv-python numpy pandas openpyxl flask*

**3. Train the Model**
*python train.py*

Ensure you have the dataset in this structure:
gender_dataset_face/
- ├── man/
- │   └── image1.jpg
- ├── woman/
-   └── image2.jpg

**4. Run Real-time Detection**
*python main.py*

**5. View Live Dashboard**
*Open webpage.html on your local server, Make sure detection_log.xlsx is in the same directory.*

## Dependencies
- TensorFlow/Keras
- OpenCV
- NumPy, Pandas
- Matplotlib
- openpyxl
- xlsx.full.min.js

## Use Cases
- Public surveillance systems
- Safety monitoring in transportation
- Integration with emergency alert systems
- Gender-specific analytics for crowd monitoring

## Future updates
  Configuring with real time location capture.
  Sending of alert msgs on family & nearest police station by detecting womans information from face detection.
  Improving further to detect face expression & voice captures methods to avoid the need of requiring the help gesture notation.
   
